# Computing-Project-2020-2021-Cameron-Davies
My 2020/2021 computing project.
Project Title: How Video Games Can Elicit Emotions From The Player.
Supervisor: Martin Read
Project Vision: Art can change people, when listening to music, watching a film, reading a book, you can come out as a different person than who you were before you interacted with the piece of art. Video games are in the best position to affect people, it’s the only type of art where you are a part of the piece, you interact with video games in a more personal and intimate way than you do with any other type of art. I’d like to explore that, how can a video game make you feel things, I’m not setting out to change somebodies perspective on life, only the best pieces of art can do that, what I’m looking to do is see if I can make people get affected in any way by my game, can I make somebody cry, make somebody scared, happy, angry, I want to look at examples of games that make you feel strong emotions and try and work out how they do this and try and replicate it. If I can break down the triggers for these emotions, it will help developers in the future make more emotionally driven video games. That is who this is for after all, video game developers, if I succeed than developers can look at my game alongside its associated report and easily be able to see how I’ve created these emotional spaces in my game, instead of having to look through numerous examples of emotional games and reports on the subject like I will, it can be used as a teaching tool on how to make players consistently feel things when playing their video games. And that is the problem, so many video games don’t make you feel much if anything at all, and it makes sense, video games are a new art form, most developers don’t know how to make its players feel much, other art forms have mastered the idea of making its audience feel something, if I can show developers how to make more emotional video games then maybe we can start feeling more than occasional satisfaction and a lack of boredom from the average AAA video game. But what will this project be? The report will be titled “How Video Games Can Elicit Emotions From The Player” and the game will be called “An Experiment Of Emotion”. How will the game play though? How a character feels can elicit different emotions so I need a neutral gameplay type that can be manipulated to fit the different emotional areas without the gameplay feeling too disjointed, of course the game will feel slightly disjointed just because of it’s more of an interactive demo on how to make the player feel things, than a normal game, but I need to keep the gameplay somewhat consistent to minimalize the feeling of a disjointed piece, and to minimise the need for many tutorials, if the gameplay shifted in every area I’d have to teach the player the new controls. The game will be first-person, you’ll be able to move, run, jump, and use your run to boost your jump, not a creative moveset but one that can be used to make the player feel different emotions such as satisfaction, joy, and frustration, yet there will be gates the player goes through that increase and decrease there movement speed and jump height, with a universal gameplay mechanic throughout all the different emotional experiences the player should feel like they’re playing through a singular game that makes them feel numerous different emotions, and not a number of games. Controlling the players movement speed and jump height is essential to making them feel different emotions, if you want them to feel happy you’d want them to be able to move fast and jump high, if you want them to feel sad you’re going to want them to walk slowly and barely be able to jump, if you want the player to feel helpless you’d give them a large area and a high run speed, or a small area and a small running speed, by limiting the game to simple gameplay it will make the project more viable to create, make the game less disjointed, and stop the player from getting confused. The game will be level-based with every level meant to make the player feel different emotions, the levels will be displayed one after another with small breathing rooms in between to try and get the player to a more neutral emotion before they heavily experience something else. I will go between a positive and a negative emotion in each level so the player doesn’t get overwhelmed, the levels will be short unless a longer level is needed to properly give the desired emotion, the short length of the levels will allow me to create numerous different levels in the short development time this game will have. I will develop this game in an interesting way, I’ll fully develop one level before moving onto the next, I’ll have a list of potential levels and I’ll just go through developing them one after another, the amount of levels that will end up in the finished product depends completely on how quickly I can develop quality levels that make the player feel things. I want to at least have three levels in the game but would prefer to have around double that. The game will need a lot of playtesting to make sure the emotions players feel from my levels are felt by a large amount of people that go through my levels, due to the pandemic I won’t be able to test many people in person, so I’ll have to rely on questionnaires. By doing extensive research on the area and highlighting it in a report and game developers will be able to understand how people interact with video games, and how they can make their games more emotional experiences. To research this I will have to do two things. I will need to look at games that have made me feel strong emotions in the past, as well as games that are known to make players feel strong emotions. I will then look at research on the area, this alongside looking at emotional video games will be where most of my research time goes into. Here are some examples of the above two areas, this isn’t a list of all the sources I will research, some of them I won’t find as useful as I currently think they are so I won’t use them, and I’ll find more sources as a research the field further.
